# Chapter 2 Objects, Types, and Values

## 2.9 Conversions

A widening conversion converts a value to an equal value or to the best approximation of an equal value. Widening conversions are usually a boon to the programmer and simplify writing code.

Unfortunately, C++ also allows for implicit narrowing conversions. By narrowing, we mean that a value is turned into a value of another type that does not equal the original value.

We can’t put a large number, such as `1000`, into a `char`. Such conversions are called *narrowing* because they put a value into an object that may be too small (“narrow”) to hold all of it. Unfortunately, conversions such as `double` to `int` and `int` to `char` are by default accepted by most compilers even though they are narrowing.

```c++
[[nodiscard]]
std::pair<int, char> narrowing(double d)
{
  int i = d;
  char c = i;
  return {i, c};
}
```

The above code is warned with `-Wconversion` option:

```
narrowing.cpp: In function ‘std::pair<int, char> narrowing(double)’:
narrowing.cpp:9:11: warning: conversion from ‘double’ to ‘int’ may change value [-Wfloat-conversion]
    9 |   int i = d;
      |           ^
narrowing.cpp:10:12: warning: conversion from ‘int’ to ‘char’ may change value [-Wconversion]
   10 |   char c = i;
      |            ^
```

You can avoid the warnings with `static_cast` expressions:

```c++
[[nodiscard]]
std::pair<int, char> narrowing(double d)
{
  int i = static_cast<int>(d);
  char c = static_cast<char>(i);
  return {i, c};
}
```

> The signedness of char depends on the compiler and the target platform [Fundamental types, cppreference]:
>  - the defaults for ARM and PowerPC are typically unsigned,
>  - the defaults for x86 and x64 are typically signed.

Why do people accept the problem of narrowing conversions? The major reason is history: C++ inherited narrowing conversions from its ancestor language, C, so from day one of C++, there existed much code that depended on narrowing conversions.

In particular, the problems with narrowing conversions are often manageable in small programs and for experienced programmers. They can be a source of errors in larger programs, though, and a significant cause of problems for novice programmers. Fortunately, compilers can warn about narrowing conversions &mdash; and many do.

For historical and practical reasons, C++ offers four notations for initialization: For example:

```c++
// narrows, some compilers warn
int x0 = 7.8;

// error: {} doesn’t narrow
int x1 {7.8};

// error: ={} doesn’t narrow (the redundant = is allowed)
int x2 = {7.8};

// narrows, some compilers warn
int x3 (7.8);
```

The `=` and `={}` notations go back to the early days of C. We use the `=` notation when an initialization simply copies its initializer and the `{}` and `={}` notations for more complex initializations and when we want compile-time protection against narrowing.

## 2.10 Type deduction: `auto`

```c++
std::pair<int, char> narrowing(double d);

void a()
{
  // structured binding
  auto [i1, c1] = narrowing(-260.8);
}
```

We use `auto` when, and only when, the type is obvious from the initializer and we don’t want any conversion.

When we use longer type names and in generic programming the notational convenience of `auto` becomes significant.
